PROJECT_INIT.md, before:

# New Obsidian Plugin Project Initialization

This document provides step-by-step instructions for creating a new Obsidian plugin project.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, you'll need to decide on the following information:

1. **Plugin ID** (e.g., `obsidian-foo`) - Used in manifest.json and as the directory name. Must be unique in the Obsidian plugin ecosystem.
2. **Plugin Name** (e.g., `Foo`) - The display name users will see
3. **Plugin Description** - A brief description of what your plugin does
4. **Plugin License** - For package.json (default: MIT)
5. **Author Name** - Your name as it should appear in the plugin
6. **Author URL** (optional) - Your website or profile URL
7. **Author Email** - For the package.json author field
8. **Local Obsidian Vault Path** - The path to your Obsidian vault for testing (e.g., `/Users/yourname/Documents/MyVault`)

## Step-by-Step Setup

### 1. Initialize Project Structure

```bash
mkdir -p src test scripts build
```

### 2. Create Git Configuration

Create `.gitignore`:

```
node_modules/
build/
.env
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create .gitignore'.

### 3. Create `package.json`

```bash
npm init -y
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'npm init -y'.

Next, edit the generated `package.json` file:

- Change `main` to `"main.js"`.
- Update `name` to your `[PLUGIN_ID]`.
- Fill in the `description`, `author`, and `license` fields with the values from the "Prerequisites" section.
- Remove any placeholder fields that aren't appropriate for the project or that we won't need, like the 'test' script that just prints an error.

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'customize package.json'.

### 4. Install Dependencies

```bash
npm install --save-dev dotenv esbuild gts obsidian typescript builtin-modules
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'npm install --save-dev dotenv esbuild gts obsidian typescript builtin-modules'.

### 5. Initialize GTS

```bash
# Initialize Google TypeScript Style (creates tsconfig.json, .eslintrc.json, .prettierrc.js, and more)
npx gts init --yes

# Remove the unnecessary index.ts file created by gts
rm src/index.ts
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'npx gts init --yes'.

### 6. Add and revise scripts in package.json

Edit package.json to include this block:

```json
{
  …
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "node esbuild.config.mjs",
    "build": "tsc -noEmit -skipLibCheck && node esbuild.config.mjs production",
    "lint": "NODE_OPTIONS=\"--no-deprecation\" gts lint && prettier --check \"*.{css,md}\" \"src/**/*.{css,md}\"",
    "clean": "gts clean",
    "compile": "tsc",
    "fix": "NODE_OPTIONS=\"--no-deprecation\" gts fix && prettier --write \"*.{css,md}\" \"src/**/*.{css,md}\"",
    "prepare": "npm run compile",
    "test": "node --test --experimental-test-module-mocks build/test/*.test.js build/test/**/*.test.js",
    "pretest": "npm run compile",
    "posttest": "npm run lint",
    "package": "npm run build && cd build && zip -r [PLUGIN_ID].zip main.js manifest.json styles.css",
    "deploy_local": "node scripts/deploy-local.mjs"
  },
  …
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'add scripts package.json'.

### 7. Customize Generated Configuration Files

The `npx gts init` command creates several configuration files. You'll need to customize some of them:

**Update `.eslintrc.json`** to allow importing 'obsidian':

```json
{
  …
  "rules": {
    "n/no-unpublished-import": ["error", {"allowModules": ["obsidian"]}]
  }
  …
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure eslint'.

**Update `tsconfig.json`** for Obsidian plugin development:

```json
{
  "extends": "./node_modules/gts/tsconfig-google.json",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "rootDir": ".",
    "outDir": "build",
    "lib": ["DOM", "ES2022"],
    "target": "ES2022",
    "moduleResolution": "node",
    "isolatedModules": true,
    "exactOptionalPropertyTypes": true,
    "noImplicitOverride": true,
    "noPropertyAccessFromIndexSignature": true,
    "noUncheckedIndexedAccess": true
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*.ts", "test/**/*.ts"]
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure typescript'.

### 8. Update EditorConfig

Note: GTS already created `.editorconfig`. Verify it contains:

```
root = true

[*]
indent_style = space
indent_size = 2
end_of_line = lf
charset = utf-8
insert_final_newline = true
```

If any changes were necessary, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure editor'.

### 9. Create Build and Deploy Scripts

Create `esbuild.config.mjs` (this is a hand-written configuration file specific to your project):

```javascript
import esbuild from "esbuild";
import process from "process";
import builtins from "builtin-modules";
import { copyFile, mkdir } from "fs/promises";

const banner = `/*
THIS IS A GENERATED/BUNDLED FILE BY ESBUILD
if you want to view the source, please visit the github repository of this plugin
*/
`;

const prod = process.argv[2] === "production";

const copyPlugin = {
  name: "copy-files",
  setup(build) {
    build.onEnd(async () => {
      await mkdir("build", { recursive: true });
      await copyFile("src/manifest.json", "build/manifest.json");
      await copyFile("src/styles.css", "build/styles.css");
    });
  },
};

const context = await esbuild.context({
  banner: {
    js: banner,
  },
  entryPoints: ["src/main.ts"],
  bundle: true,
  external: ["obsidian", "electron", ...builtins],
  format: "cjs",
  target: "es2018",
  logLevel: "info",
  sourcemap: prod ? false : "inline",
  treeShaking: true,
  outfile: "build/main.js",
  minify: prod,
  plugins: [copyPlugin],
});

if (prod) {
  await context.rebuild();
  process.exit(0);
} else {
  await context.watch();
}
```

Create `scripts/deploy-local.mjs`:

```javascript
#!/usr/bin/env node

import "dotenv/config";
import { copyFileSync, mkdirSync } from "fs";
import { join } from "path";

const pluginDir = process.env.OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH;
if (!pluginDir) {
  console.error("Please set OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH in .env file");
  process.exit(1);
}
mkdirSync(pluginDir, { recursive: true });

["main.js", "manifest.json", "styles.css"].forEach((file) => {
  const src = join("build", file);
  const dest = join(pluginDir, file);
  copyFileSync(src, dest);
});

console.log("Deployed to", pluginDir);
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create build and deploy scripts'.

### 10. Create Plugin Source Files

Create `src/manifest.json`:

```json
{
  "id": "[PLUGIN_ID]",
  "name": "[PLUGIN_NAME]",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "[PLUGIN_DESCRIPTION]",
  "author": "[AUTHOR_NAME]",
  "authorUrl": "[AUTHOR_URL]",
  "isDesktopOnly": false
}
```

Create an empty file at `src/styles.css`

Create `src/main.ts`:

```typescript
import {Plugin} from 'obsidian';

export default class [PLUGIN_NAME]Plugin extends Plugin {
  override async onload() {
    console.log('Loading [PLUGIN_NAME]');
  }

  override onunload() {
    console.log('Unloading [PLUGIN_NAME]');
  }
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create plugin source files'.

### 11. Set Up Git Hooks

Create `.git/hooks/pre-commit`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
npm run fix
```

Make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'set up pre-commit hook'.

### 12. Set Up Local Development Environment

Create `.env` file:

```
OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH=[VAULT_PATH]/.obsidian/plugins/[PLUGIN_ID]
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create .env file'.

### 13. Create Basic Test

Create `test/main.test.ts`:

```typescript
import { test } from "node:test";
import * as assert from "node:assert";

void test("basic test infrastructure works", () => {
  // Basic test to verify test infrastructure works
  assert.equal(1 + 1, 2);
});
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create basic test'.

### 14. Create README.md

Compose a standard README.md based on what you can glean about the project. Add the sections that are commonly found in a GitHub project.

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create README.md'.

## Verification Steps

After completing the setup:

1. **Test the build system:**

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

2. **Run tests:**

   ```bash
   npm test
   ```

3. **Check linting:**

   ```bash
   npm run fix
   npm run lint
   ```

4. **Test local deployment:**

   ```bash
   npm run deploy_local
   ```

5. **Create a package:**
   ```bash
   npm run package
   ```

## Notes

- Throughout this document, placeholders are marked with `[BRACKETS]` - replace these with your actual values
- The NODE_OPTIONS flag suppresses deprecation warnings from the gts dependency (see [gts PR #928](https://github.com/google/gts/pull/928))

Commit message:

populate package.json with better values from the jump

PROJECT_INIT.md, after:

# New Obsidian Plugin Project Initialization

This document provides step-by-step instructions for creating a new Obsidian plugin project.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, you'll need to decide on the following information:

1. **Plugin ID** (e.g., `obsidian-foo`) - Used in manifest.json and as the directory name. Must be unique in the Obsidian plugin ecosystem.
2. **Plugin Name** (e.g., `Foo`) - The display name users will see
3. **Plugin Description** - A brief description of what your plugin does
4. **Plugin License** - For package.json (default: MIT)
5. **Author Name** - Your name as it should appear in the plugin
6. **Author URL** (optional) - Your website or profile URL
7. **Author Email** - For the package.json author field
8. **Local Obsidian Vault Path** - The path to your Obsidian vault for testing (e.g., `/Users/yourname/Documents/MyVault`)

## Step-by-Step Setup

### 1. Initialize Project Structure

```bash
mkdir -p src test scripts build
```

### 2. Create Git Configuration

Create `.gitignore`:

```
node_modules/
build/
.env
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create .gitignore'.

### 3. Create `package.json`

Use `npm init` with flags to pre-fill the `package.json` file. Replace the bracketed placeholders with your actual values.

```bash
npm init -y \
  --init-author-name="[AUTHOR_NAME]" \
  --init-author-email="[AUTHOR_EMAIL]" \
  --init-author-url="[AUTHOR_URL]" \
  --init-license="[LICENSE]"
```

Now, stage and commit the changes. The commit message should be the command you ran, including all flags and values.

Next, edit the generated `package.json` file:

- Change `main` to `"main.js"`.
- Update `name` to your `[PLUGIN_ID]`.
- Fill in the `description` with the value from the "Prerequisites" section.
- Remove any placeholder fields that aren't appropriate for the project or that we won't need, like the 'test' script that just prints an error.

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'customize package.json'.

### 4. Install Dependencies

```bash
npm install --save-dev dotenv esbuild gts obsidian typescript builtin-modules
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'npm install --save-dev dotenv esbuild gts obsidian typescript builtin-modules'.

### 5. Initialize GTS

```bash
# Initialize Google TypeScript Style (creates tsconfig.json, .eslintrc.json, .prettierrc.js, and more)
npx gts init --yes

# Remove the unnecessary index.ts file created by gts
rm src/index.ts
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'npx gts init --yes'.

### 6. Add and revise scripts in package.json

Edit package.json to include this block:

```json
{
  …
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "node esbuild.config.mjs",
    "build": "tsc -noEmit -skipLibCheck && node esbuild.config.mjs production",
    "lint": "NODE_OPTIONS=\"--no-deprecation\" gts lint && prettier --check \"*.{css,md}\" \"src/**/*.{css,md}\"",
    "clean": "gts clean",
    "compile": "tsc",
    "fix": "NODE_OPTIONS=\"--no-deprecation\" gts fix && prettier --write \"*.{css,md}\" \"src/**/*.{css,md}\"",
    "prepare": "npm run compile",
    "test": "node --test --experimental-test-module-mocks build/test/*.test.js build/test/**/*.test.js",
    "pretest": "npm run compile",
    "posttest": "npm run lint",
    "package": "npm run build && cd build && zip -r [PLUGIN_ID].zip main.js manifest.json styles.css",
    "deploy_local": "node scripts/deploy-local.mjs"
  },
  …
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'add scripts package.json'.

### 7. Customize Generated Configuration Files

The `npx gts init` command creates several configuration files. You'll need to customize some of them:

**Update `.eslintrc.json`** to allow importing 'obsidian':

```json
{
  …
  "rules": {
    "n/no-unpublished-import": ["error", {"allowModules": ["obsidian"]}]
  }
  …
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure eslint'.

**Update `tsconfig.json`** for Obsidian plugin development:

```json
{
  "extends": "./node_modules/gts/tsconfig-google.json",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "rootDir": ".",
    "outDir": "build",
    "lib": ["DOM", "ES2022"],
    "target": "ES2022",
    "moduleResolution": "node",
    "isolatedModules": true,
    "exactOptionalPropertyTypes": true,
    "noImplicitOverride": true,
    "noPropertyAccessFromIndexSignature": true,
    "noUncheckedIndexedAccess": true
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*.ts", "test/**/*.ts"]
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure typescript'.

### 8. Update EditorConfig

Note: GTS already created `.editorconfig`. Verify it contains:

```
root = true

[*]
indent_style = space
indent_size = 2
end_of_line = lf
charset = utf-8
insert_final_newline = true
```

If any changes were necessary, stage and commit the changes with the message 'configure editor'.

### 9. Create Build and Deploy Scripts

Create `esbuild.config.mjs` (this is a hand-written configuration file specific to your project):

```javascript
import esbuild from "esbuild";
import process from "process";
import builtins from "builtin-modules";
import { copyFile, mkdir } from "fs/promises";

const banner = `/*
THIS IS A GENERATED/BUNDLED FILE BY ESBUILD
if you want to view the source, please visit the github repository of this plugin
*/
`;

const prod = process.argv[2] === "production";

const copyPlugin = {
  name: "copy-files",
  setup(build) {
    build.onEnd(async () => {
      await mkdir("build", { recursive: true });
      await copyFile("src/manifest.json", "build/manifest.json");
      await copyFile("src/styles.css", "build/styles.css");
    });
  },
};

const context = await esbuild.context({
  banner: {
    js: banner,
  },
  entryPoints: ["src/main.ts"],
  bundle: true,
  external: ["obsidian", "electron", ...builtins],
  format: "cjs",
  target: "es2018",
  logLevel: "info",
  sourcemap: prod ? false : "inline",
  treeShaking: true,
  outfile: "build/main.js",
  minify: prod,
  plugins: [copyPlugin],
});

if (prod) {
  await context.rebuild();
  process.exit(0);
} else {
  await context.watch();
}
```

Create `scripts/deploy-local.mjs`:

```javascript
#!/usr/bin/env node

import "dotenv/config";
import { copyFileSync, mkdirSync } from "fs";
import { join } from "path";

const pluginDir = process.env.OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH;
if (!pluginDir) {
  console.error("Please set OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH in .env file");
  process.exit(1);
}
mkdirSync(pluginDir, { recursive: true });

["main.js", "manifest.json", "styles.css"].forEach((file) => {
  const src = join("build", file);
  const dest = join(pluginDir, file);
  copyFileSync(src, dest);
});

console.log("Deployed to", pluginDir);
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create build and deploy scripts'.

### 10. Create Plugin Source Files

Create `src/manifest.json`:

```json
{
  "id": "[PLUGIN_ID]",
  "name": "[PLUGIN_NAME]",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "[PLUGIN_DESCRIPTION]",
  "author": "[AUTHOR_NAME]",
  "authorUrl": "[AUTHOR_URL]",
  "isDesktopOnly": false
}
```

Create an empty file at `src/styles.css`

Create `src/main.ts`:

```typescript
import {Plugin} from 'obsidian';

export default class [PLUGIN_NAME]Plugin extends Plugin {
  override async onload() {
    console.log('Loading [PLUGIN_NAME]');
  }

  override onunload() {
    console.log('Unloading [PLUGIN_NAME]');
  }
}
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create plugin source files'.

### 11. Set Up Git Hooks

Create `.git/hooks/pre-commit`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
npm run fix
```

Make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'set up pre-commit hook'.

### 12. Set Up Local Development Environment

Create `.env` file:

```
OBSIDIAN_PLUGIN_PATH=[VAULT_PATH]/.obsidian/plugins/[PLUGIN_ID]
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create .env file'.

### 13. Create Basic Test

Create `test/main.test.ts`:

```typescript
import { test } from "node:test";
import * as assert from "node:assert";

void test("basic test infrastructure works", () => {
  // Basic test to verify test infrastructure works
  assert.equal(1 + 1, 2);
});
```

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create basic test'.

### 14. Create README.md

Compose a standard README.md based on what you can glean about the project. Add the sections that are commonly found in a GitHub project.

Now, stage and commit the changes with the message 'create README.md'.

## Verification Steps

After completing the setup:

1. **Test the build system:**

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

2. **Run tests:**

   ```bash
   npm test
   ```

3. **Check linting:**

   ```bash
   npm run fix
   npm run lint
   ```

4. **Test local deployment:**

   ```bash
   npm run deploy_local
   ```

5. **Create a package:**
   ```bash
   npm run package
   ```

## Notes

- Throughout this document, placeholders are marked with `[BRACKETS]` - replace these with your actual values
- The NODE_OPTIONS flag suppresses deprecation warnings from the gts dependency (see [gts PR #928](https://github.com/google/gts/pull/928))
